Turtle Shell Chess

Introduction

Since 1994, I have wanted to create a playable Chess variant using this
particular tessellation, a tiling that the Wikpedia calls a 33344-33434
tiling.

When I was trying to come up with a Chess variant with this tiling back
then, my then roommate said my board looked like a “Turtle Shell”,
which is why this variant is called “Turtle Shell Chess”.

It took me 28 years, but I have finally formalized the rules for “Turtle
Shell Chess”.

The board

This Chess variant is played on a board using a tiling which combines
squares and triangles. Pieces are placed and moved inside of the squares
and triangles. The places where pieces may go are called cells; there
are 64 cells in Turtle Shell Chess.

Naming the cells

A modified form of algebraic notation is using to give each cell on the
board a unique designation.

See the file TurtleShell.png for the names of the cells.

Rows

The board has 10 rows in it. Because of the nature of the tiling, some
cells are in more than one row. Rooks can move left and right along rows.

Rows include:

B9-C9-D9-E8-E9-F9-G9
B7-B8-C8-D8-F8-G8-G7
B7-B8-C7-D7-F7-G8-G7 (note some overlap with the previous row)
A6-B6-C6-D6-E7-E6-F6-G6-H6
A5-C5-B5-D5-E5-G5-F5-H5
A4-C4-B5-D5-E5-G5-F4-H4 (again, some overlap)
A3-B3-C3-D3-E2-E3-F3-G3
etc.

Files

The board has six files. As with rows, some cells are in more than one
file. Rooks can move up and down files, and pawns can move as well as
capture one square towards the opponent’s endzone on a given file.

Files are:

B0-B1-B3-A3-A4-A5-A6-B6-B7-B9
C0-C1-B2-C2-C3-C4-B5-C5-C6-C7-B8-C8-C9
D0-E1-D2-D2-E2-D3-D5-D6-E7-D7-D8-E8-D9
E0-E1-D2-D2-E2-E3-E5-E6-E7-D7-D8-E8-E9 (this is the only overlap)
F0-F1-G2-F2-F3-F4-G5-F5-G6-F7-G8-F8-F9
G0-G1-G3-H3-H4-H5-H6-G6-G7-G9

Promotion zones

Any pawn placed in the opponent’s promotion zone may be promoted to a
rook. A pawn not in the opponent’s endzone is not required to promote;
promotion is mandatory once in the endzone. There is no limit on the
number of promoted pawns allowed on the board.

Promotion zones are, for white, light yellow, and, for black, light
red (peach) in the included TurtleShell.png diagram.

End zones

Any pawn placed in the opponent’s end zone is required to promote to a
rook. If a player is able to place his king in the opponent’s end zone,
they immediately win the game.

End zones are, for white, tan, and for red, darker red in the
TurtleShell.png diagram.

Movement and capture

Each piece is Turtle shell chess has a given movement to it. If a piece
moves to a square occupied by an opponent’s piece, the opponent’s
piece in question is removed from the board; this is called capture.

The rook

A rook may move any number of cells along a row or file until it is
blocked by a piece of the same color. If there is an enemy piece on the
rook’s path, the rook may capture that piece, but the rook may not
continue moving after capturing.

A rook must make an entire single move along the same row or file. For
example, a rook on D0 may move to D3 (which is on the same file) but
may not move to E3, because moving to E3 is only possible from D0 if
the rook changes the file they are on during the move.

The guard

The guard may move or capture to any cell it shares an edge with. If a
cell is a triangle, a guard may move or capture to any of the up to three
adjacent cells. If the cell is a square, a guard may move or capture to
any of the up to four adjacent cells.  

The knight

A knight in Turtle Shell Chess may move or capture to any cell that it
shares a corner with, as long as the cell in question does not share an
edge with the cell the knight is in.

A knight, if in a triangle cell, may move to up to six different
cells. If in a square cell, a knight might be able to move to up to
eight different cells.

The pawn

A pawn has the same move and capture: It may move one cell forward
towards the opponent’s endzone along a file. If a pawn ends its move in
the opponent’s promotion zone, it may, at the player’s discretion,
promote in to a rook immediately after ending its move in the promotion
zone. If a pawn ends its move in the opponent’s end zone, it must
promote in to a rook immediately after ending its move.

For example, if the white player moves a pawn from C5 to C6, they may
make the pawn on C6 a rook on the same turn the pawn moved from C5 to C6.

A pawn must have moved on the same turn when it is promoted.

A white pawn on the E2 triangle cell may move or capture to either the
D3 cell or the E3 cell. A black pawn on the E7 triangle cell may move
or capture to either the D6 cell or E6 cell. Otherwise, each pawn may
only move to the cell immediately in front of it on the same file.

The king

A king moves as a guard. If the opponent threatens to capture the king,
the king is said to be in check and must make a move to stop the threat
of capture. If it is not possible to stop the check (by either capturing
the piece giving check, interposing a piece between a rook giving check
and the king, or moving the king to a square not under threat of opponent
capture), the king is under checkmate and the player giving checkmate
has won the game.

If a king ends its turn on a square in the opponent’s end zone without
being in check, the game is immediately won for the person who moved
their king across the board.

Repetition of move

If making a move which recreates a position previously played in this
game, with the same player having the move as the previous position,
the attacking player must stop the loop. An attacking player is defined
as the player who, for all board positions in the loop, just after the
attacker has moved, more capture threats (including check) are on the
board regardless of the color of the piece making the capture threat. This
is calculated by adding together all possible capture moves for each
unique board position in the loop per player. In case this sum is the
same for both players, the player who gives check more often (i.e. has
more king capture threats, where a double check is 2 threats) in the
loop of moves is the player who must make a different move to break the
loop. In case the sum of possible captures is the same for both players
during the loop, and both players give the same total number of checks
(0 or more) in the loop, the player whose move starts the loop must make
a different move to break the loop.

This is a modified “Ko” rule. When playing with a computer, the
computer would enforce this rule. When playing on a physical board, the
rule would be more subjectively enforced: Someone appearing to attack
an opponents piece resulting in a repeat of a previous position would
be asked to stop the attack by making another move or forfeit the game.

Objective

The object of the game is to checkmate the opponent’s king, or to place
one’s own king on a square in the opponent’s end zone without the
king being in check. Stalemate is losing for the player giving stalemate.

Setup

In the initial setup, each side has seven pawns, two rooks, two knights,
two guards, and one king.

Notes

Some notes about this game:

While a number of hexagonal chess variants have been invented, chess
variants using other tilings are relatively rare. One such variant is
Rhombic chess by Tony Paletta. Other variants are the variants by Dekle
(Triangular chess, Tri-chess, Masonic chess, Trishogi, Masonic shogi,
etc.)

The knight is more like the ferz piece, but it is called the “Knight”
here because that is a more familiar name, because “fers” means
“queen” in Russian, and because the piece has more mobility with this
tiling (6-8 squares instead of the four a ferz has on a square board).

I have, in the last 28 years of speculating about this variant, considered
pieces with circular moves. One issue with circular moves is that chess
doesn’t have circular moves, so they might not be very intuitive for
chess players, and because they can make the C3, C6, F3, and F6 cells
too powerful.

It’s possible to play Go with this board: One Go variant would be played
inside the cells, where each piece would have three or four liberties
(unless on the edge or next to another piece), depending on whether
the cell was a square or triangle. It would also be possible to play Go
on the corners of the cells; here each piece would normally have five
liberties. In both cases, a larger board would be closer to 19x19 Go.

There are 360 possible starting positions if we shuffle the pieces along
the back row.

Playing with Shogi style drops is also a rule I considered while inventing
this variant. This is an optional rule, but not an official rule (so
it can be played with normal chess pieces; just place a checker or coin
under promoted pawns).

Other possible optional pieces include: a piece which moves forwards or
backwards like a rook, but otherwise like a guard, akin to Chu Shogi’s
shugyo (vertical mover); a piece which combines a rook and knight (a
cardinal or marshal, if you will; I would place them on D1 and D8);
and a piece which combines the guard and knight.

A combination of the modified Ko rule and the end zone win rule greatly
reduces (if not eliminates) draws. Because of the geometry of the board,
one king can not block the other king from reaching the end zone (there
is no opposition in Turtle Shell Chess).

The “stop an attack if it causes repetition” rule is a simplification
of similar rules in Xiangqi (Chinese chess). For an example of this
in a real world game, let’s look at Fischer-Tal Leipzig 1960. Here,
after 21... Qg4+ by Tal, the game was drawn because of 22. Kh1 Qf3+
23. Kg1 Qg4+ 24. Kh1 Qf3+ and so on. Using Turtle Shell rules, since the
loop begins at 22. Kh1 and repeats with 24. Kh1, we look at the number
of possible capturing moves at each stage in the loop, where each ply
in the loop is looked at precisely once: 22. 1 attack (Qh7xe7) 2 attacks
(Qh7xe7; Qf3xh1) 23. 1 attack (Qh7xe7) 2 attacks (Qh7xe7; Qg4xg1) and the
loop repeats on move 24 so we look no further. For both moves (4 plies)
in the loop, the board has more threats when Black has moved (4 total
across the loop: 2 attacks both times Black has moved) than when White
has moved (2 total across the loop: 1 attack each time White has moved),
so Black is the one who needs to break the loop if this 1960 Chess game
had Turtle Shell repetition rules.

Optional Rules

Diagonal moves

We can add diagonal moves to have a reasonable implementation of a 
bishop or of pawns which capture diagonally forwards.

The way diagonal moves are implemented in a way which is reasonably
intuitive is as follows:

* Diagonal moves are colorbound: Any move that starts on a square ends
  on a square.  Likewise, any move that starts on a triangle ends on a
  triangle.
* Diagonal moves go in four directions: NW, NE, SW, and SE, which are
  short for northwest, northeast, southwest, and southeast.

The rules for moving diagonally one of the directions are nearly the
same for each direction, as follows:

NW:
* If on a triangle and making a NW move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the north or west, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a NW move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the north nor west, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the northwest of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a NW move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the north or west, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a NW move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the north nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the northwest of the origin square.

NE:
* If on a triangle and making a NE move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the north or east, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a NE move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the north nor east, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the northeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a NE move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the north or east, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a NE move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the north nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the northeast of the origin square.

SW:
* If on a triangle and making a SW move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the south or west, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a SW move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the south nor west, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a SW move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the south or west, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a SW move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the south nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the southwest of the origin square.

SE:
* If on a triangle and making a SE move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the south or east, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a SE move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the south nor east, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a SE move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the south or east, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a SE move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the south nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin square.

Again, to clarify with triangles:

* If the origin triangle shares two edges with other triangles, the
  destination square will be a triangle one shares an edge with.
* The desination square, when moving across a diagonal corner instead
  of across an edge, will always be a triangle which only shares one
  edge with another triangle.

The result of this is that diagonal moves will be on a jagged path,
alternating between moving straight along a clump of two squares or three
triangles, then moving diagonally from one group of cells to another group.

Copyright 

I dedicate the rules of this game and all graphics and code
illustrating this game to the public domain.

