The way diagonal moves are implemented in a way which is reasonably
intuitive is as follows:

* Diagonal moves are colorbound: Any move that starts on a square ends
  on a square.  Likewise, any move that starts on a triangle ends on a
  triangle.
* Diagonal moves go in four directions: NW, NE, SW, and SE, which are
  short for northwest, northeast, southwest, and southeast.

The rules for moving diagonally one of the directions are nearly the
same for each direction, as follows:

NW:
* If on a triangle and making a NW move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the north or west, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a NW move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the north nor west, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the northwest of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a NW move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the north or west, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a NW move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the north nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the northwest of the origin square.

NE:
* If on a triangle and making a NE move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the north or east, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a NE move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the north nor east, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the northeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a NE move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the north or east, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a NE move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the north nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the northeast of the origin square.

SW:
* If on a triangle and making a SW move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the south or west, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a SW move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the south nor west, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a SW move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the south or west, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a SW move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the south nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the southwest of the origin square.

SE:
* If on a triangle and making a SE move, if there is a triangle sharing
  an edge to the south or east, go to the triangle.
* If on a triangle and making a SE move, and there is no triangle sharing
  an edge to the south nor east, go to a triangle one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin triangle that shares only one edge with
  another triangle.
* If on a square and making a SE move, if there is a square which shares 
  an edge to the south or east, go to that square.
* If on a square and making a SE move, if there is no square which shares
  an edge to the south nor east, go to the sqaure one shares a corner with
  to the southeast of the origin square.

Again, to clarify with triangles:

* If the origin triangle shares two edges with other triangles, the
  destination square will be a triangle one shares an edge with.
* The desination square, when moving across a diagonal corner instead
  of across an edge, will always be a triangle which only shares one
  edge with another triangle.

The result of this is that diagonal moves will be on a jagged path,
alternating between moving straight along a clump of two squares or three
triangles, then moving diagonally from one group of cells to another group.

This particular path is more easy to visualize than the nightrider
path, and allows an experienced Turtle Shell player to easily visualize
the diagonal path a given piece can make.
